the international court of justice is
due to hold hearings over extra
emergency measures sought by South
Africa against Israel's attacks on Rafa
during its war in Gaza that ptor is
demanding an immediate halt to Israeli
violence more than 1.5 million
Palestinians who've been Sheltering in
the southern city are now fleeing South
Africa wants the court to order Israel
to allow unhindered access to this strip
for un officials humanitarian agencies
journalists and investigators the un's
top court ordered Israel in January to
do everything in its power to prevent
genocidal acts and allow Aid into Gaza
William shabas is a professor of
international law at middle sex
University his work is focused on human
rights and international criminal law
and he joins us now live from London Mr
chabas always nice to have you on the
program thanks for your time can we just
begin with another hearing at the icj
being brought about by South Africa for
additional measures have the ground
realities changed in Gaza in enough in
your opinion for this presentation to be
made by South Africa they tried in
January and it nothing much
happened well yes they've gone back this
will be the fourth request by South
Africa for provisional measures and as
you mentioned at the end of January they
were successful in getting an order they
again obtained an additional order late
in March and they are arguing now
they'll be presenting before the court
this afternoon in the ha um that the
circumstances have have developed and
evolved now where they are essentially
claiming that they're in this is the end
this is the end of Gaza and with the
destruction of Rafa the threatened
destruction of Rafa that that this is
sort of the final stage and and so
they're asking for a renewed order and
in particular they're focusing on a
requirement of a ceasefire that the
military activities stop altogether and
this will be for the court to decide the
court
has clearly indicated the urgency of the
matter the application was filed on
Friday of last week and they've said a
hearing for today 5 days later and this
is really uh extremely unusual they
haven't responded with the same kind of
urgency before so it shows that the
court is taking this as a very serious
matter uh I just want to reiterate do
you actually think that the the the the
presentation of this is the end for Rafa
is going to sway the
Court well U you know it's it's a
difficult thing to predict how a court
is going to respond the court has been
fairly consistent in its uh in in the
way it's addressed this crisis since
since January and I think it's fairly
United on it uh how of course the court
has a lot of freedom in terms of what
they order as well I don't see them
retreating for anything they've said
earlier um but you know they could they
could either reinforce it they could
make a much stronger order um this is
really in this these are the details
these are the nuances it's a court
that's that although it tries to get
unanimity in its orders uh there are a
lot have been a lot of separate opinions
in recent in the more recent orders not
just in this case but also in the
companion case that was filed by
Nicaragua against Germany and so you
know the courts these are
17 15 individuals with with their own
views and their own approaches so it's
it's very difficult to predict exactly
what's going to emerge so Mr shabas just
for our International audience as well
just to clarify uh South Africa has made
these approaches to the icj orders have
been made to some extent have they been
implemented by Israel from October the
7th to
today no they have not and of course
this is one of the things that South
Africa is seeking is some recognition by
the court that Israel has failed to
implement them it doesn't mean that
these have been to no purpose or to have
no effect because they have clearly
influen the political situation and the
political debate the determinations by
the court in these provisional measures
orders have had a huge political impact
uh not only on on states that have been
traditionally very critical of Israel
but also on many of the states that are
most friendly to it who are persuaded I
think
are increasingly persuaded uh of the of
the of the harm that Israel is doing and
of the need to stop it by the rulings of
the court to date so they've been
significant in my opinion we we will
certainly see what the court does have
to say and how the presentations are
laid out around about 1300 uh GMT here
on Al jazer William shabas joining us
from London thank you
sir make sure to Subs subbe to our
channel to get the latest news from alaz